I
fig Eric did that from yeah Eric you can
come
back uh we didn't start the meeting yet
we were waiting for
you I didn't hit that
I didn't want you didn't watch you we
only have one
visit yeah upate the time
yeah you sure priority SC
okay let's just get
started so must be Lo so at 7:05 called
the meeting order and first order of
business is to
stand the flag of the United States of
America the rep for it stands one
nation
indivisible okay so the next uh item on
the agenda is public speak and uh
Kim I think you're maybe the only person
of the public here's
not
Finance yeah I'm actually attending as a
board of Finance member via Zoom thank
you um I guess that was that was the
next thing that I was going to suggest
we do is we just go around the room and
if everybody would just say their name
and what board they're on that uh that
might be helpful so
fa with you L Goodwin Board of Finance
Liz lat Board of Finance Eric Becker
Board of Education rers Bo of Finance
Celeste Willard Board of Education Joan
Heber for of Finance Kate
Greenhouse Larson Planning and Zoning
but for tonight it'll be moderator of
the meeting janon L
Jerry
and Jeff Maguire b s Scott Pon Ro to
select okay and uh Eric and Valerie
don't don't you want to come over here
and be part of the team or have a SE at
the table well thanks we will come over
if you need us to at that
point you guys introduce yourselves also
Taylor cracker principal and Terry Smith
Finance director for and over Elementary
School head School
Eric
quiet Eric
Anderson thank you
um so moving on to the next item here
would be changes or additions to the
agenda do anybody have any changes or
additions that they would like to
present okay hearing none we'll move on
to the next item which is the Andover
Elementary School Capital Improvement
fund usage protocol discussion and
possible
actions and uh I don't know who should
lead off on that but Shannon I know you
you were trying to work with I think
Robert yeah and from the last meeting
and maybe you can just give an update on
how that went and where we stand okay so
we drafted a policy uh the Board of
Education passed it um this past June I
think um they then went in front of the
board of Finance um they liked policy
but wanted input from the town attorney
Dennis O'Brien um then wanted from the
board of Selectmen and now we're kind of
at an impass we don't have a policy
that's been passed and at the last Board
of selectman meeting um to the board of
Finance I suggested that if we can't
pass a tri board policy that we might
consider using um the mechanism that
already existed in the past um for our
2% non-aps and account for the new
capital fund that been created for the
school the Board of Education and that
would be basically an agreement between
I guess the Board of Education and the
board of Finance um that would say that
the board of education has to ask
permission from the board of Finance to
deposit money into that account um and
we would ask permission to take it out
as financial representative of the town
and the Board of Education that seems to
make sense to me um if we can't do it
otherwise well that sounds kind of
reasonable I'm sure is is there anybody
who would like to address what they saw
as concerns on the
uh the draft that
uh Robert and Shannon I don't know if
you want to speak to that on but we have
Haven seen I haven't seen a came back
from the attorney um so I haven't seen
that yet so I don't really have any
input coming from The Other Board of
find members have or not my concern was
just I know that we had been talking
about it for a long time and it was
decided that we would come up with a
policy so Rob and Shannon had put a lot
of time into drafting like this
onepage thing that all of you know just
for a little history and then I know it
made its way um you know up into the
board of
Selectmen meeting and then I was
listening and then I don't have that I
was looking for it quickly today to try
to print the differences so I don't know
Jeff do you remember like what I can
comment real quickly so Dennis um didn't
offer advice on it he changed it he had
um significantly um so he cut it down
from like a two two person per board
membership to one person per board and
put on that it would be the chair of
each board and that wasn't really what
was intended it was intended to be a
committee like anything would be a
committee so Dennis made a lot of
changes um and didn't just provide
advice on the existing policy that had
been passed by the board of De we have I
guess I'm unaware has that been like
presented at another meeting the changes
that he it was presented to the board of
selected you guys talked about it but
was there a physical document that it
was first was it in September but it got
waved to October because I was looking
through the minutes I'm trying to
refresh any tonight um and then I think
they talked about it in the October
meeting so we're now just at the
beginning of December so it hasn't been
that long so maybe Eric or maybe they
are working on it if there is going to
or not I mean I guess I guess the
question really is I've had this
question from the beginning no one's
been able to give me a real answer what
is the problem that
this committee is solving that's not
getting done currently because what
seems to have existed in the past is
that like the Board of Ed would say they
had a capital project and we told at one
point in time by the board of Selectmen
that like it was a schools thing we had
to figure out how to use the money to
get money for it we're way past that
like you guys put money into the capital
account for the school I think just to
have everyone on the same page that the
the way that we're asking to use that
money and how that money is being used
is like it I I think it would be great
and you said at the last meeting like it
should just be between the board of
finance and the Board of Ed like that's
how it should be and that that would be
great um well but but people have said
in the past like on the board of on the
board of finance that they wanted the
board of selectman's input and so now we
we've gone a year right from when we
started this process and what came out
of having a tri board meeting last year
was the fact that we wanted to create a
policy so that there would be a way to
use that money appropriately and
everyone was on the same page and it was
supposed to be a policy between the
Board of Education and the board of
Finance which is why Robert and I were
tasked with preparing or drafting the
policy well I think we'd be better off
understanding what our three boards
handle like in just getting the lay of
the land and really understanding what's
up because I don't think we have the
right understanding of what we're all
responsible so the board of Finance
obviously has responsibility for the
funding making sure that everything that
goes through in a budget gets approved
and it's spent that's your narrow Focus
but it's very important and what
happened we have three basic segments
within our town we have the town budget
the AES budget and we have the ram
budget the ram budget is 4.2 million in
the ballpark the AES budget is $4.2
million at n Ballpark and the town
budget is $4.2 million bless we're all
real even but understanding the town
budget which the board of Selectmen is
responsible for presenting to the board
of Finance for approval we have a $2.5
million operating budget and a $1.5
million Capital that capital budget is
used for the benefit of the entire town
right it's used for for public works
it's used for the fire department it's
used for the school right that's what we
currently have okay we have a process
within place this is why I've gotten you
know I've never gotten a straight answer
I've never understood what we have CIP
that is a board that consists of members
of all of the different groups Board of
Finance Board of Selectmen Board of
Education right that is supposed to go
to that group and sit there and say here
are our plans but the board of education
is exempt from no it is not let's now
talk about what it is you are exempt
from the from that process for
operational expenses
this building that we currently sit in
is not a board of education building
it's a town asset it's part of the
capital no one else in their budget has
a capital line except the town that's
it does the Board of Education have a
capital line in in their
budget we would like to but we do not
you don't that's because state law sits
there and says that the town owns the
assets inside inside this building Board
of Education total control how you
educate children total control the board
of Selectmen has never since I've been
out the ever come back to the board of
selectman and told you how to spend your
money within the school
ever and that's not our purview not what
we do not what we have control over we
are the board of selectman is the
overarching trying to protect all the
interests of all the people within the
community including the
children right so I just ask I'm really
it it's a frustrating to me that a
policy and I've said this came I said
why did you not come to the board
selectman and have a discussion a common
sense discussion over what our roles are
and how we work together because I'll
also come back to you not once have
since I've been on the board of Select
have we ever sat there and flat out
rejected a legitimate request from the
the school on any project wait wait wait
wait wait wait you attempted you
attempted to pave a
driveway that this is where you have to
go back to your attorney from the last
tri board meeting and understand what
the priorities what what capital means
and doesn't
mean right you are going to pave a
driveway without going to Jed and
planning and zoning you were going to go
pave a driveway without going to Public
Works the people in our town in our
community the people we pay the town the
whole town pays to sit there and pave
roads and do roadway you were going to
bypass everybody because this board the
Board of Education believes that it
controls and it owns the physical
structures that these children get
educated that is not the
case right we all need to work together
your attorney said it better than I
could have ever said he said it but no
no one seems to want to listen to what
your attorney say so how so how are how
what is your plan for how we work
together on Capital project here give us
a fiveyear plan just like every other
group within this community does goes
you guys are in control of what you want
to spend on it we as a group have to
determine if we can fund it the board of
Finance has to tell us we don't have
money I mean everybody's got to give a
little but you come with a plan that
there and says hey I know you guys need
to spend money on a bat right we've
either got to put money away for the
bathrooms or we've got to sit there and
go to the taxpayer and say we need some
more money to do these bathrooms it's
that
important I'll sit there and do it with
you if that's what's really important
the board of finance will sit there and
say yeah maybe maybe not I don't want to
do that but that's how we work together
that's how we've always done this before
we've gotten into this whole
I own the building and we do whatever we
want that's not reality it's never going
to fly I'm telling you it's never going
to fly we either all come together at
like the last meeting I hope the last
tri board meeting was a very nice cial
meeting collegial we could figure out
how to work
together I remember getting r a riot act
that we did something wrong and when you
know the board of Selectmen was was at
fault for multiple things didn't start
off well not my intention was not I
actually wanted this meeting to come to
this meeting and just have drinks with
everybody and get to know who you are so
that when we have to talk to each other
it's acceptable communication and we're
all working but before we get there the
Board of Education primarily has to
understand what is capital and who is
responsible for it you guys are
responsible for providing the plan as to
what you need and then the board of
Selectmen sits there and goes to the
board of finance and presents what it
feels it can it can get done and if the
board of Finance doesn't like our
recommendations and you go to them and
you tell them we really need the money
and they say they can figure out how to
fund it it's on the board of Finance
that's their job not so what you're
suggesting just to summarize and tell me
if I'm wrong is that the board of
education for Capital expenditures
should go to the board of Selectmen and
ask permission for you to
present CIP if is pro Shannon has been a
member for multiple years I don't
understand why we haven't used it CIP
sits there and evaluates how we what
capital projects we have out sits there
and says hey we should be spending money
on that because that's important does
everybody know what CIB
is capital Improvement planning plan
planning plan but all the CIP does Jeff
respectfully is make recommendations on
capital projects that then go for
approval to the board of Selectmen so
what you're suggesting is that the board
of education has to go to the CIP and
eventually has to go to the board of
Selectmen to ask what we're asking to do
with the board of finance and I want to
get back to you said you've never turned
stuff down yes not true what we July
11th
2022 you turn down specifically our
superintendent's request for a generator
and spent six mon minutes of that
meeting because I recently watched it
again to tell Valerie that you couldn't
help her because it's all between the
board of finance and not the board of
Selectmen so Valerie then went to the
board of Finance with exactly what we're
talking about today let's have a policy
between the two of us when we met a year
ago it was very clear that it was
supposed to be between the Board of
Education and the board of Finance it's
not been very clear you it was why were
we asked to do the policy listen listen
the fire department does the exact same
stuff and we fund the fire department to
sit there and get their stuff this is
not the board the public works is not a
separate entity like the AES or the the
fire department so I want to I want to
be clear as to what the organizations
are but everybody comes and does the
same things but but that's that's the
hard part at least for me and in in what
I've read and I don't I think other
people should speak as well as the three
of us um but you the board of education
is not a department of the
like the way that that works is not
exactly the same when we've had money at
the end of a budget and we needed to
redo the floors upstairs like we're able
to say we want to redo the floors
upstairs and do it so so inside the
building inside the building right
inside the building not a mechanical
structure I'm at it like we're not gonna
tell you nothing no one's for a
generator Jeff you know when Shannon you
go to that generator and I'll sit there
and I'll go because that was that was
adrianne's issue related to the
generator was another reason why that
got pushed because there was funding
That was supposed to happen at a
different time and it was chosen not to
do go in that direction so the the and
and listen I am going to tell you the
Board of Education thinks it's going to
get everything that it ask approv
exactly when it gets approved this town
is incapable of raising funds in certain
ways so so we have to work together it's
there's no other way there's nothing
else I can lay out for anybody else if I
could say one thing too Jeff like I like
that you're bringing that to the table
and again I mean watching these meetings
and being a part of them for the last
few years too it's definitely going to
come to some type of Trust on
everybody's side to hopefully move it
forward because I know that a lot of
things that have happened in the past
still probably hurt deeply or you know
they dig deep or whatever I'd like to
see us move forward too with some kind
of and like Caitlyn said um and you have
said too I mean I've been at many
meetings when you said that you want to
just move forward but I can understand
why the mistrust is there just based on
everything that keeps being brought up
I'm a type that I like to move forward
to after a while because we keep
recycling this so if Jeff does have an
idea and I know we were prepare a
fiveyear capital plan what things the
Board of Education sees coming out in
the future that it needs get addressed
and then we as a community Finance
selectman Board of Education all need to
come together and say these are the
available resources we have this is what
we can do and we can't do and and it's
just reality I not I'm not I I sound you
know worse than this is but I'm just
telling you we just need to work
together So the fiveyear plan is that
you want that presented to CIP or you
want to have another tri board meeting
to present that like listen I I see you
presenting it to CIP and then CIP taking
and and listing out the things we're do
so I I know that we asked the fire
department for their plan they give us
their plan let me tell you she'll tell
you they give us their plan and they ask
for everything right and there's certain
things that we sit there
and we have sat in the last six years
and tried to bank money and fund these
funds
and try to put away money because we
know we cannot hit the town up for all
the money needed all in one year so we
put money away and it was the same thing
that we did with the the Board of
Education building we know we have
problems coming up we're not blind we're
not mean people you know I'm not mean I
support the school in every possible way
that I can right so but it's common
sense and what you're asking I would sit
there and tell you when my your asking
for a whole new process to be in put in
place that doesn't need to be there and
it shouldn't be there and it's just a
way to gain control over some other
issue we all have responsibilities roles
and responsibilities what education's
role is to educate the children word a
finance role is to take care of our
money and make sure that we don't do
anything stupid with it the bard of
selectman's role is to try to have an
overarching view of the community and
try to plan and do do things that are
right for the community long term that
that's what I perceive my goal to and my
job so I'm just wondering does the real
issue come down to the new capital fund
that was created the non- reoccurring
just to understand how that money can be
accessed for projects I think that's
what they're asking for policy outside
of all the other they put forth what
their they their priorities are if they
sat there and said their priority was
the driveway right that's
$150,000 we might be able to tackle that
because we have the money there if
they're telling us the the the priority
is the bathrooms and that's a $300,000
project we might have to work with you
we put $100,000 away there there's some
extra more money there I think what is
the number in that fund
209 so but we need to put more in listen
the school the school is our biggest
physical
asset it's the it's the biggest building
in
town it needs it what was it uh seven
years ago we put the roof on this
building
$400,000 thereabouts job it's not like
the building's been ignored but I will
tell you I haven't seen A Five-Year Plan
or any list of any physical projects
that would like to get done that lists
sit out for for us to see into the
future as to what we need to
we've had requests for uh the floor and
the gym and the the bleachers and you
tried to do the driveway and I'll sit
there and I'll go yeah you know the
driveway is a little bit of a problem
because everybody's got to play by the
rules should have went to planning the
zoner should have should have sat there
and done a lot of things within that
process so yes we did sit there and say
no because again it's getting an
understanding as a group as a group what
is a capital asset and who has the
responsibility for those asset and Jee I
know that in the school district that I
work there you know we see the capital
plan we see the capital things listed
out you know when they present their
budget or when they have their but I
would like wouldn't we all like to see
like priorities I mean we should if
we're going to talk General we should
give is that not what item six on the
agenda I thought that we we were going
to tonight so I kind of like to no I'm
just talking about the capital plan in
general like it's a document but then am
I going above that I just meant I don't
know but first I think the first thing
is the prioritized lists of what we want
to do which generate the capital plan
and then we figure out how we're going
to fund it well in on this agenda I
thought that this is just a light
overview because obviously we're coming
start right and I think I think we keep
going in a circle right because and and
and the end goal is the same like right
we all have the same positive end goal
in mind but like to talk about a
protocol for how we use the
fund I want to I want to know the
protocol for how we use it before we
continue to fund it you want the plan of
what the things are that we want to do
with it before we continue to fund it no
I want to work with you to understand
what your priorities are so when we put
your priorities in front of the board of
Finance they're in the correct order
that the Board of Education believes
they need to be so so I would I would
like to go back you know one of the
things I didn't care for the last time
we got together was we ended abruptly
and we didn't talk about what it was
that we agreed on at the meeting and I
thought we lost some of that but I did
take a couple of
notes and these were the points that I
heard the Board of Ed attorney rep Tom
Mooney provide to us
the Board of Ed and Andover Elementary
School are part of the town and should
be working
together Board of Ed needs a capital
expenditure
plan the Board of Ed and the town need
to be married to each other with regards
to the capital expenditure
plan the town was not asking the board
of ed for anything they could not be
obtained by anyone using a freedom of
information
request and there was no evidence that
the town was trying to tell the Board of
Education what to do with their
operation budget so that's what I took
away
from Tom Mooney at the last meeting and
I
thought that if we if we as a group
could agree with just those things that
would help but I'm not sure we're there
yet I think we should I think we should
be there I think we should be too we
have to be there it's a question it's
question for me this is the only thing
that I sit there and see as a is a very
gray area from the Board of Education
stand the building again is a physical
capital asset of the town just like the
town hall just like the fire department
just like the library just like any
other
building if you could get past the
concept that if you got to do a
roof you got to do the roof the Board of
Education isn't going to fund that roof
it's not part of the the budgetary
process is not part of any it's a town
which which goes back to the board of
Selectmen presenting the budget and
giving it to the board of Finance to sit
there and say approv in reality in my
mind very simple Common Sense thing is
here are the list of things to
do these are the things that we need to
sit there and present to the board of of
Finance we may not be able to get that
job totally done but maybe we put away
50 or $100,000 and then the board of
Finance gets to see that this is all the
money going to these Capital plans
because again the town's budget is $4
million million and a half is for
Capital just saying I it's not it's not
anything that anyone should have like
there shouldn't be a gray area anymore I
I honestly I would like to today if we
could just get past the issue that this
building is a town asset it's part of
it's got to be part of the capital plan
the parking lot is part of the capital
plan everything is part of the capital
plan if you put a book in the building
part of the board of education budget we
never mess with what about the elevator
right what about the plumbing like has
to be elevator Plumbing has to be part
of it has to be part of it I'm just
telling it has to be part of it I
think can
she well you have to come to the table
so I think I think one of the major
issues for me in this small town is and
I disagree with a couple of things that
you think are very clearly um black and
white and they're not if we think about
so my role is superintendent usually it
says superintendent of schools in this
town only of one school so if you look
at every other town there are obviously
State statutes and there are Town
Charters if you look at big cities small
cities there is um you know there are
lanes and and and I know that it's very
easy to say everything goes through the
board of select um sure if you want to
very clearly say whether it's Andover or
let's take GL bear it's a bigger town
you say are the properties themselves
Town owned sure they are they're
absolutely Town owned no superintendent
Board of Education owns that building
however there are roles and
responsibilities of each board and it
would be silly if any other board in
this town thought that they had a role
and responsibility to oversee the money
that's clearly you know agreed upon by
everybody in this room that that's the
board of finings but then the role in
responsibility gets a little mudded when
there's one school involved so Jeff you
just keep saying that things within the
school the principal runs the day-to-day
operations of the building that is not
the board of edge that's not my job if I
had 10 schools 12 schools like glenberry
I wouldn't be running day-to-day
operations of the school I'd be running
the school
district the oversight of the school
district is the superintendent however
the board of education is the town
elected board that oversees everything
related to 35 School Road they do if
it's Glastonberry it is the board of
education's job to have oversight of
every school in Glastonberry that's the
way it is that is the rule that's the
law that is absolutely in our town
Charter that says that that is why there
are multiple times where it says
excludes the Board of Education excludes
the Board of Education now in the town
this size with one school let's picture
lanes because we say you know we like
people to be in their Lan if you have
one lane road this way you have one lane
road this way that yellow line in the
middle that's the board of Finance
because the board of Finance has a
different Lane but they kind of oversee
both of the other lames because finances
are absolutely clear that you guys would
oversee everything you keep saying that
we're no different than the fire
department we're no different than
Library we absolutely are there is no
Town elected board like the board of
Finance the Board of Education and the
board of Selectmen please let me finish
jeck thank you um where they oversee
just library library is a department of
of the board select in most other larger
towns there are um cities say there are
the general fund operational just like
Ram has actually in the regional and
there is um another budget a separate
budget that would be a capital budget so
it's usually very clear that you know um
in this particular Town we've never had
one we've been trying to establish one
because up until this point we've used
all and every bit of our extra
operational funds to to do Capital
related things within the building now
in every other town if it's a board of
ed Board of Education also has
subcommittees and they have
subcommittees that are the finance
subcommittee the facility subcommittee
there are facilities and operations
people um not just custodians there are
facilities and operations people in the
town uh board of education for Hein and
board of education for Marboro for Ram
they have their own people but they're
under the opes of the Board of
Education not town but what Tom Mooney
will say always is this is good practice
this we've been trying to do is to get a
board of Finance or Board of Education
and the board of Selectmen to all work
together and the last part that um Moone
had mentioned because that was a little
bit of a bone of contention at the time
for us with the driveway was it is true
that that money was general fund money
it was operational money the Board of
Education was at that time following
everything related not only to the law
because by law by Statute they oversee
the Appropriations that were given to
them for the general fund by Charter if
they needed an additional appropriation
they would have gone to the board of
Finance which it was not an additional
appropriation and the charter States
very clearly that if it goes to the
board of Finance the board of Finance as
Shannon mentioned would go to CIP so we
were not violating anything there
because we were following not only the
General statute of the law but we were
also following the charter that was
money that was the general fund money
that due to Grants and things was there
for the Board of Education to continue
to do we have somebody coming out to fix
lights in the parking lot um Shannon
mentioned earlier that yes historically
we have gone not just for the generator
for other things and that meeting itself
that you know she made mention of the
board of Selectmen did say at that time
had as they had for 10 years prior um
when things happen you guys have to
figure it out you're the Board of
Education that's what the board of
education is here for I do think that
the problem is sometimes it gets a
little gray and a little muddy because
we have one school but it does not
change the role and responsibility of
the Board of Education of the
superintendent and of the principal the
day-to-day operations of this building
the books the curriculum that's not my
job or the board of education on a
day-to-day basis that's the principal's
job to take care of the day-to-day
operations of what goes on in the
building and then when we look at the
next step that's the superintendent's
job and again whether it's one school or
10 schools that would be the
superintendent's job then the Board of
Education makes those higher decisions
that I think Jeff is saying should go to
the board of Selectmen they don't go to
the board of Selectmen for approval in
other towns they just don't that's the
responsibility of the board of education
so where we need to work together is now
we actually are at a point and yes it
was 18 months ago that I went to
robber because we were at a point where
we still weren't being given an
operation I mean a capital budget from
the town but we could help create one on
our own due to Surplus due to Grants
that offset things and so because of
that then we were 1,000% willing to say
this is money that needs to go toward
Capital stuff so we don't have to ask
anybody for anything else we want you
guys as the finance people to
appropriate that for us we're going to
say you tell us put it into that
separate account we'll come to you and
tell you what needs to be done now we
also have to remember that as a small
town we have departments we have a a
public works department we have a fire
department we have a library we don't
have a huge maintenance department
either so we do have to work together on
things but then we have to hire outside
as well so it is going to take us
working together on projects to get
these things done absolutely moving
forward so we're going to have to have
those conversations but legally the town
board that oversees this is elected and
it's the board of education so we didn't
violate anything to do with the charter
we didn't violate anything to do with
State Statute and coming up with this
policy now is a new policy because we've
never had a capital account before so
that's why we went to to to you guys
before so I I'm sorry that sounds
longwinded but it is difficult sometimes
when we are a one little town with three
boards for people to understand there
are roles and responsibilities um of
each and they are State Statute and they
are you know clearcut uh oversight and
it's an elected body their job is not to
Fig out books in the library that's not
the board of edge job that's here and
they're here um they don't figure out
the books in the library I don't even
figure out the books in the library
Taylor figures out the books in the
library so I I will say for one I missed
missed something when we were talking
about how one school is harder than a
bunch of schools it sounded not
harder sometimes I feel Jeb like when
when Jeff kind of simplifies the role of
the board the role of the super the role
of the principal that because it's one
school he thinks we all run what goes on
inside of this building and that's it
and that's not the case but isn't it
isn't it a good deal for the Board of
Education if the town capital budget is
going to fund Board of Education
projects isn't that a win for you guys
it wouldn't that be knew we haven't had
that before um there are no projects
that have been funded since in the five
years I've been here right okay okay
wait wait a second my oversimplification
just so everybody understands my
oversimplification is
simply I am talking about the building I
am talking about the walls the roof the
electrical the elevator all of that
stuff comes under the capital when I
reference the books and the operational
spending I don't care I I know the board
of education is really overall
respons the principal may spend
but you're responsible for and and
that's where I'm saying the board of
Selectmen doesn't interfere in that
that's what I was trying to express to
everybody here so you understand when I
sit there and reference this building to
the fire department into the library
they all have the same implications to
the town we have to we have to keep them
up and we have to do a good job of it
this town has honestly not done the best
job of keeping this up until the last
six or seven years yes
yeah and anyone who doesn't believe that
should you know you can't you can't even
argue it like that that we've done more
in the last six or seven
years it's been it's a new thing there's
a lot of stuff happening the last six or
seven years and didn't Happ before just
a school that was neglected because I
think the school was neglected for was
neglected the roads were neglected
buildings were neglected so this is the
issue and this is the issue that the
superintendent will sit there and take
except it's a
it's a pool we only have a pool for
everything I can't do everything I would
want to do for the Board of Education
and for this building I can't we cannot
we cannot we can't do everything for our
roads as Bill since they in refence we
can't do everything for every building
that we need to we we chip away and if
we don't work as a team we don't work as
a team and you can wait for me y if we
if we don't work as a team we will
continue to fight over this right right
it's either we work together and we get
it done and you come back to the group
whether it's the board of educa board of
selectman or the board of Finance the
CIP is how it's supposed to be done go
to CIP and present your plan for what
you want done and win and then you can
sit there and be at the table at the
same time as we a lot our monies for the
$1.5 million that we have available
right to sit there and see what we can
do you think for selectman oversees the
board of that no I told you that no no
so so who who my question is a sincere
one I'm not trying to be confrontation
with you J um so who is it that goes to
CIP the board of Selectmen or the Board
of Education the CIP group makes
recommendations but who goes to them
you're you're repres prorities your your
plan what your representative who's been
on the board for how many years so but
I'm trying to back up so if if the Board
of Ed decides that there's a a project
here yeah that needs to be done and and
and they want to move forward um with
that project and it's not our general
fund what's the trajectory of where they
go from there who do they go to
First
even even though the charter says that
it it it doesn't say operational Jeff
I'm looking here on my thing it said it
does not apply to the Board of Education
you can go to your attorney and go ask
him the question and you've never
listened to him no it's not Tom money is
not our attorney okay somebody else is
no never Tom roody came as an advisor as
a as a courtesy last time Jeff okay
didn't you own the building are you
responsible we are responsible resp by
law by law we are responsible for the
care maintenance and operation
maintenance of
buildings land yeah apparat
and other property used for school
purposes and at all times shall ensure
all such buildings and Capital Equipment
contained therein against loss and an
amount Blah Blah
Blah by law we're responsible for
buildings land you can twist it anywhere
I'm not twisting it you guys can decide
what you
want
Yeah by law the Board of Education shall
have the care maintenance and operation
y maintenance and operation agreed okay
keep of
buildings lands
so we have a we have we have a we have a
a property right that by the lines and
whatnot defines what the property is for
the school correct right are we sh if
you want to build school next year build
school try to get all I'm trying say is
look it's two things we have a law and
we have a charter the charter says the
Board of Education doesn't have to go
before
CIP which is where this whole thing came
into it I'm just ask if you wanted to
build a new school how would you go
about it how would you build a new
school and how would that happen would
you do that out of your operational
budget or you'd have to go to the town
to get the capital funds to build a new
school correct I guess that's true thank
you very much that's it that's trying
say capital building it's a but then
what is what is our responsibility Bill
said the operational maintenance of the
building here here's what I'm
hearing is Shannon you talked about some
things you're responsible for building
and all that kind of stuff it doesn't
talk about the process by which you
execute those responsibilities which can
be through going to the capital appr
Improvement plan and working with all
the other priorities of the town and
you've got a voice and a very strong one
that you can get in there and and make
your case for why these things are
important and we've got to work together
at that with a little bit
of but our Charter says we don't go to
CIP it's not just for our operational
budget does the charter say you can't do
CIP it doesn't say that it says that we
are exempt from CIP why have we had a
member from the of education on CIP for
as long as I've been engaged in this why
do we have one from the board of Finance
why do we have one from the fire Board
of because it's common sense it makes
sense you
bring go ahead I've been on CIP now for
almost a year and to me it seems like
people come with their projects we
listen oh yeah that sounds good okay
yeah we'll say go ahead and do it but we
don't really understand on CIP the
finance end of it that's the finance the
board of Finance um and then I think
that having a fiveyear capital plan is
probably one of our best things so that
we can look at everything at what's
coming what's coming in the future maybe
you know you guess at it but you plan it
and the other thing I wanted to say is
the way I look at it the
school the Board of Education and the
school is the custodian of the property
the property is owned by the town but
the school is the custodian of it and
has to manage the care of it so it's
that in between thing like Valerie was
saying all working together I agree 100%
I like the idea of the tri board policy
as a way to discuss these things with
just two people from each board instead
of trying to get this whole crowd
together and agree on something it it
and I agree with you 100% And nothing
happens within in my mind nothing
happens Common Sense tells me nothing
happens to this building without the
approval of the Board of Education even
if we come up let's sit there and say
that the board of Select and decided
they wanted to do something to the
school we wanted to add a new elevator
build a pool right build a pool we build
a pool if we didn't have your buying we
can't do it just the same way if you
don't have our buy you can't do it yeah
said the fans of the
gym well listen the fans in the gym if
you sit there and say you don't want the
fans then guess what you you don't have
to have the fans that that that's my
point but he but Jeff came and presented
that to the board Jeff was trying to do
something that's appropriate for that
building in my mind because we do have
heat loss there whether you want the
fans or not we approved it I
I
mying so those those are the whole
that's the whole thing it's all to me
it's all common sense we've got so far
off how do we move forward how do we
move forward how do we work together
because we've we've spent 50 minutes
rehashing the past you we so then this
was all discussed at the last tri board
meeting so how do we use this money this
$29,000 in this fund for the bathrooms
and I'll tell you Jeff the priorities
are the bathrooms uh the other priority
is the elevator and the other priority
is the driveway in that order so number
one is the bathroom number two is the
elevator and number three is the
driveway so so yes we don't have a
fiveyear capital plan we are working on
that that is one of our goals to have a
five-year plan we have made that very
clear to our superintendent and the
other members of the board that that's
what we're going to do okay so we we are
working on that but how do we get along
how do we work together to to to to fix
the bathrooms to fix the elevator and to
fix the driveway H how do we do that
instead of
rehashing what who owns this who
custodial of this how do we come up with
a plan right now tonight to do this
stuff that's what I would like simple
simple as it can be right if the Board
of Education sits there and says that
the bathrooms is the number one priority
which which I just said you just did we
go we go in with our budget and we sit
there and say we have $200,000 in this
fund y non- taxed to the citizens
because they've been taxed on it before
it's not in the current year we're not
raising our Revenue needed we sit there
and determine what the price is for the
bathrooms let's say it's $350,000
we need another
$150,000 then we have to determine
whether we can go to the board of
Finance with that request for an extra
$150,000 to do the
bathrooms now it would have be it would
be nice it would have been nice if maybe
the bathrooms were on the list five
years ago as a as a potentially coming
down the road issue that's not how it's
been that's not what's going on you're
going to get to it we're getting there
right so my whole point is it's if you
say that's your priority right we have
$200,000
$212,000 in the Board of Education
building fund we go to the board of of
finance and we say Hey listen bathrooms
need to get done here's the expected
cost this is the extra money we need can
we raise it this year yes or no who's we
the board of Finance I just said
who of
Finance it's bold it's together because
again in our budget is the the Capital
Money the budget the budget for the
capital money is not in the board of
education's it's not we have to go
together so I think if you go back to
the policy that Robert and Chen tried to
work on that's what they were trying to
create without it being all of us here
at the table no but you you are you are
sitting there you are sitting there
looking at one narrow issue of the Board
of Education and the money that's in
that fund that's it it's not the whole
town it's not every other building in
this town it's not everything you have
to look at in a holistic total manner to
determine if that's where the money can
go because that's what's got to get to
the board of finance and again Board of
Finance can make any change to what it
wants anyway it's you know it's just how
it is but to go back to I don't know if
it Joan or Celeste how do we go forward
I think the way we do that is you got a
good first step there you said bathrooms
elevator and parking lot right so that's
that takes care of the next thing you we
we know your priorities we integrate
them with this other stuff if we begin
with the end in
mind there's this Capital Improvement
plan and it will say in there that the
Board of Ed priorities are these three
and then we'll take a look at what the
town priorities are and maybe we can't
get the parking lot this year but but
hopefully you would understand want the
park lot bathroom yeah I got it but but
that process through that Capital
Improvement plan committee you know
brings together a plan that we all talk
about Board of selectman's got to be on
board with it before it goes to the town
meeting board of Finance has to be on
board with it and board event has to be
on board with it everybody should be
agreeing we just got figure out how to
fund it that's all so we have are how
much each one cost the prioritize and
then we figure out how we're going to
raise the money and we have to have a
fiveyear plan to raise 4 for a new roof
or whatever the amount of money is we
put that hand together and figure out
how we to find it but if no one's
talking to each other you just going to
do things in your own little vacuum how
you going to raise the money to do these
things that's the only reason I think
Jeff is saying what he's saying we're
all trying to say is we need to agree
and work together to fund projects
there's no way you on your own to your
operational budget standing all loone in
your own little Sal say we're do this
this this and this really we're going to
get the money for that you got to have a
plan you got to have prices and you got
to say this is how we're going to raise
the money put it to the town the town
okay at the end of the day that all
comes back to like like we as a board of
education need to trust the other two
boards think I said the word trust early
that that we all want what's best for
our town and our school right like like
to trust that we now have this fund
which exists and when we put money into
that that it's going to stay there for
Capital Improvement projects otherwise
like we're just giving the money back to
the town anyway so it doesn't make a
difference okay so back to that go back
to that it's not it's not just schools
money that built that it's the taxpayers
money that built that one because we put
$100,000 even though everybody believes
that 100,000 112 or whatever came back
from the school it's it's it's there and
from an accounting perspective it's a
fund it's not going away that's what I'm
the the town is not going to spend it on
something else the board of Selectmen is
not going to rate it go buy another plow
great but you need trust you need the
Board of Ed to trust that but but even
if you don't trust it it's the auditor
it's like there's there's there's a
whole issue of the auditor audits it and
sits there and says that's what's in
that non-aps fund and that's what's
there I
mean or anything or anything we
have I think it was somebody else said
they've had money taken out by the town
that needed the fund for something else
that's a good conspiracy I like
that I Valerie come over here Eric and
then I want to hear what you got to say
J when um Eric beer
has
Eric dou Eric thing I'm interested is
does the town have a good definition of
what the capital project is probably not
as good as it should be okay but so I
think take away too from the standpoint
from a common sense standpoint it's the
building oh yeah understand that's
that's basically it not to reference it
again but there is a pretty good
definition of what would be considered a
capital project in the policy that they
wrote together but not but not in the
charter but also an existing definition
that the board of Finance has voted on
and agreed to as part of their normal
policies so you could certainly start
with that definition also I happen to
think that definition was a little low
personally I would prefer it to be
higher um but that's a board of Finance
ultimately I think that's a board of
Finance decision where they think the
line is between capital and operating or
Capital
needs that definition like when we got
the Flor refinished that would have been
a capital project the money speci two
quick things before era to we we have to
we're thankful that in the past they
used their operational budget to do
these things so that's that's a great
thing so I I mean because there was
money left over and they put it towards
things that were needed and also that
this fund was created is such a positive
that's why what I can't take from some
of these meetings is why we're dragging
it down with the minutia when now we
have it we just need a plan let's get
them all
prioritized and we're moving to that
direction so it's so positive that the
trust has to be there so we can get it
off the ground thank you very has there
been a number put for the bathrooms
yet um no not not a we're working to get
an estimate um but roughly Scott um
we're looking at anywhere between 250 to
300,000 close to P it so Eric I'd like
you to finish up your nickels worth here
so it's a big project a you know doing
the bathroom um when we had this
discussion last spring you know my take
on it was the very first thing that
needed to happen was you needed to find
an MEP a civil engineer that specializes
in mechanical electrical and plumbing
systems um I interviewed a couple of
them we brought one out to give us an
evaluation in the quote as far as I
understand um we could have executed
that last spring and we could have done
it with the money that the board of
Selectmen agreed to take out of the
building maintenance fund to fund it and
not the capital fund well that is a
capital fund just take it out of a
different but the Board of Ed made the
decision you wanted to find a different
engineer so specifically to have someone
who dealt with things that happen in
schools and how specific understood
understood it wasn't for like yeah a
negative reason no and I I think that's
one of the things the engineer said was
there were some parts of that that he
was uncomfortable with yeah because it
was a school and that's why he was
subbing a lot of some of the design
phase out to an architect so they
covered that and that's fine and I think
the town could still potentially cover
the cost of the me as long as it's
reasonable out of that fund and preserve
the capital fund I think in and I don't
know what a potential Surplus is for the
school but presuming that there's a
reasonable Surplus in the school's
budget um I don't see any reason why we
can't as part of the normal budget
process request additional money um for
that and you return a portion of the
whatever you have left to that fund and
have the cash on hand to do that next
summer but if you're going to do that
you need to execute right now with the
MEP to give them long enough time to
come up with the plan right you know and
then it's going to go have to go out to
RFP the other thing I don't understand
and I don't know what the breakoff is
but obviously the state has some funding
available for schools for major Capital
maintenance projects I don't know what's
involved with that um I was reading a
school recently was planning on redoing
all the roots of their schools and they
were getting about 80% of that f funding
from the state and 20% was coming out of
their own coppers that sounds great to
me but I don't know the rules for any of
the school stuff I know you know what
grants are available on the town side so
that would be something I would think
you would want to pursue because if you
can spend somebody else's money that's
always better um obviously it's going to
be over the threshold that it will be a
prevailing wage job um you're going to
have to deal with the Connecticut
Council on human rights
so it seems to me that's a big enough
project you're going to need some
construction oversight on it whether you
hire a GC you know and have him do it
but you got to start with the plan first
and you're going to have to hire a
professional to do it because that's too
big to just have a plumber come up with
a a plan for no no absolutely yeah yeah
so I know the last you takeway I wrote
down from the last meeting was I think
the Board of Ed would like to have
agreement that they can put money from a
preceding year into the capital plan
budget without hurting them financially
with future budgets I know you've gone
off and worked hard Valerie on getting
grants and you wanted to have that money
used for the school yes does that when
we've talked about this capital budget
for the school thing do that does that
resolve or is there still something
Shannon's policy goes through the the
board of Finance absolutely because the
103 that we had left from last year is
in there the 100 that was asked of this
2425 budget from the town is in there
the original 8,000 is in there so that's
the 212 and then when this audit is
finished Surplus we we would ask the
board of Finance permission to put it in
there from the year that they're
finishing up now and then yes all of
that money is money that we are looking
for the three priorities as s mentioned
them so yes that's absolutely all we
need the board of Finance to say is yep
you're as soon as you have a number when
the audit's done come to us and yep that
would be where it would go because we
know we have priorities and then as a
project is approved by the board they
would certainly go to the board of
finance and say okay let's talk and I'm
sure the board of Finance would say okay
let's talk to CIP um show us what you
got here Bo to select me show us what
you got and um yeah because to point we
we absolutely have already found
potential oversight umbrella companies
contract companies CL was one of them
that came and presented to the board
because we are and we have that proposal
they've already given it to them um
oversight because we are aware that um
we do need that so yeah the problem
would be solved absolutely if when we
have a number we're able to go to the
board um and like we used to with the 2%
before the law change and say hey this
what we have left okay with you we put
it in here and you guys were to say yes
that goes in there and then we can't
take it out without
information so the
uh I'm trying to wrap this portion
up but do you have the uh I know you
submit lots of Grants and you've gotten
lots of money for the betterman in
school and I don't think any of them
have been for the state money for the
schools that Eric was talking about for
roots and buildings is that something
you can do or is that something so when
those come up and we're eligible
absolutely those are when those come up
and they're eligible those are ones that
I would have to automatically sit down
with the board of Selectmen before even
the board of Finance because those State
projects that money is different than
most of the other grants that we get
that one's more like what the town gets
and there steep grants and Other M ipal
grants where the actual application
itself requires and the last time I
found in this town it was done was when
the septic was done back in the 90s in
the back it was the same kind of thing
you had to put together a council and
the council had to include certain
members of the board of Selectmen
members of Finance there was a whole
committee that had to be put together
those grants absolutely require that
that is that anybody can do alone so so
here's here's one of the things that I
think
I like the way the town has done
recently if they started bragging about
all the projects we're doing because
we've got grants to do whether it's the
bridge the uh the ball fields the the
um all that stuff we're saying we
couldn't have done any of this stuff
without and uh
that's I think it would be advantageous
to the school when they're talking about
their budget to to somehow figure out
how to do that same kind of thing but I
but I know there's been a reluctance to
show all the grant money we're bringing
in because you think it's going to get
cut out of the budget with you and if
you're using it for good things with the
capital stuff and that I I
thinkes Jed were not as a result of
capital grants those have been few and
far between um on a school level I had I
did apply for one that I worked with
Eric in the town on which was a deep
grant that didn't um didn't go through
but any of those capital I would
absolutely have to go through them um
and and make sure that we fill that
application out together but the other
grants the other grants um that come
along um none of them have been capital
okay um the the Surplus money is because
of it taking care of other things that
didn't need to come and I don't
understand and don't want to understand
the financial as the regulations that
they go through that but I do
think that the way ahead is to
start on the next section of this where
we listen to the board of bed or Celeste
leaves in five minutes yes Sor she's
already given she's already given most
of what she's got I know I I have a
babysitter I'm sorry but I would like to
move on to the next one with the board
of on the Capal the root project that
was done about six seven years ago was
was state funded it was a c okay I'm
just Jed real quick just pointing out
jarry's had his hand up for a little
while now so okay yeah good I just want
to say I'm listening to everybody who's
speaking and I hear a lot of
agreement but I'm puzzled by we had put
the agreement that everybody's agreeing
to Shannon work with Robert for a long
time hours to put together a policy or a
road map call it what you will it's a
road map to move from point A to point
B why is it that road map was brought to
the border of
Selectmen and Rewritten by the town
attorney that looked nothing like the
original
agreement the board of Finance is the
one that said we agree with this we like
it it was puty up and the bo of find
said let's just make sure the town
attorney one attorney I know Town
attorney just looks at it make sure it
all looks good it's called and I guess
from there is where it got a
little
okay you're well we just want to make
sure that what we were doing and I think
Boe agreed that's look at and make sure
this is all legal that's where it is and
I'll be really honest I don't remember
sending it to the town attorney I didn't
send it I don't who did was it you Shan
I don't know who sent it to the attorney
the draft that you and Robert created I
thought it was sent by the board of
Finance for was of fin sent I didn't I
don't know if marked did I have we had
agreed to it we liked it it might have
you requested that that we sent it I I
don't recall what's the next step the
next step is because I guess I got the
impression from you Jeff that like the
board of Selectmen is not doesn't want
this is not I'm only one I'm only one
member I I know M I know I would tell
you I was never in favor of it we were
never consulted in the initial stages of
it and I would have gone through the
same issues again we have a process in
place we can all work together if you
try if you don't try you can put this
policy in place and and there will be
members of my board that will vote for
that policy I would not be one of them
so I'm just telling you we have a way to
do it it it has worked in the past if we
work together can we make a good faith
effort to try to use the existing policy
and if it doesn't work then we'll go you
know and I'm certainly not the guy who's
going to figure out whether it works or
not the way that he's saying to do it so
we go to CIP which we're not required to
do but we can as a board say we're gonna
go to CIP okay and then they go to the
board of Selectmen and then the board of
Selectmen goes to the board of Finance
right
that's what listen I Celeste I could get
together with you in five minutes and
come up with a plan to sit there and say
okay this is what we're gonna present to
you I it's got out it's got out of
[Music]
control okay but but the first step
might be to try that process because we
didn't we didn't know what it was a
while ago now we're starting to figure
it out I think it it sounds pretty
reasonable to me and if it doesn't work
then we can you know modify a little bit
so what so I mean and not to cut you off
J I'm sorry but um I mean I've given you
you know the the top three it's the
bathrooms it's the elevator and it's the
driveway so what what more I guess what
more information do you need or do you
need to move things forward I think the
first thing is just how
much going to cost how how are we going
to fund as the board of Finance how so
much money Rec curring fund what more
money are we going to need and how are
we going to raise it is going to be
taxation or air have
wayt figure how say earlier you just
your priorities so when does Finance
need that
information I guess if we want to get
this project done this year I guess we
need it as soon as possible we need do
it someone Point earlier we got I think
Eric said we got to get the MP we got to
get the RFP has to go out to RFP we got
then we need a range a range what we
need is I'm going to give you you're not
going to give us a
final just a range and if the range is
$350,000 and we can get it done for 310
the town is better on
right you just you just sit there and
you got to get a
range what's that but you have
ranges but when does it need to be to
support the accelerated budget process
that we kind of created needs to be part
of the accelerated budget now yeah put
the budget
together over the next three four months
so I would think the first step would be
get the budget for the bathroom that was
the top of your list and if you
can't we have that how about the
elevator um we don't have any but we
have we have like guesstimate okay
that's but but that's what a capital
plan is is a guesstimate it's just it's
just here are here are the things that
we see coming down the road that we have
to plan for as a community that's it
that's all it is yeah I think you know
the answer to the driveway yeah but but
even the driveway and I would sit there
and go the driveway we probably as a
town are not just going to want to pave
that driveway we don't to want to pay
the whole lower parking lot and the rest
of the parking lot for the the town hall
that didn't get done and maybe even the
the the fire the basketball court it has
a giant all of those things should get
rolled into what are the overall
priorities for and so the way I see this
going forward is that Shannon is member
of the capital Improvement plan takes
those priorities and meets with these
other people and
hopefully we get consensus on this will
work so get this get this information to
you Shannon and then Shannon presents
it well I can put together
that's all I'm saying you know the head
I don't want do that
ton
that but here's the opportunity I think
after we get I think we've just done
6A which is identify major items that
affect future costs in the 25 26 budget
year you'd like all three of those in
there they might not all three make it
but we know your priorities and then you
start looking at the next 3 to five
years you don't have that tonight so
there's nothing to brief
um like you'll start thinking about
those things so we can figure it out now
you're going to have to leave but the
rest of
the stay here and listen to the town
when when we get go and I
think I think it's going be easy now yes
it's G to get hard in the future when
the when the grand budget starts going
up
again we need to practice it why it's
easy right thank you everyone I
appreciate it thank you Jeff thank you
Phil thank you
anything
else I was just gonna say that um this s
brought this pling project to CIP back
in March okay of this year so that's
already gone to CIP now we've just got
to keep moving with everything else
remember that Celeste I'm sorry I'm
sorry one more time you you went to cing
to C with this project yes I did
and U that it was to go and get the U MP
y right and C approv getting so we
approved that so now we got to keep
moving with the rest of it right right
right so that part of the process has
been done already so is there anything
else about the budget priorities for the
Board of Education that anyway on the
board of education would like to share
at this point before we go on to the T
pres so when I had written that in the
agenda I didn't necessarily mean capital
projects but I don't know I I thought
you guys wanted an overview of like what
the percent budgetary increase is or
what things are driving major changes we
thought we touch B on the budget process
we're all together you
know what are you anticipating as a
percentage
increase I'm not the person that answer
that question we don't have a number yet
however I can speak to some of the
things that you'll anticipate um real
quick um I mean the good news is I don't
have as many needs as I know the town
did last year because I know that 16 Hur
I promise it's not 16 so that's good
because I know that one was tough last
year with the needs that the town had um
but we are expanding um and we've been
expanding you know slowly few kids here
and there for the past five years thank
goodness um the question on there was
where do we anticipate um
demographically in the next half years
normally preco it was NASDAQ numbers and
that was pretty easy um it was you know
very very easy to look I know um you
know we have that through RAM and so
they were able to predict he Bernando or
marbor and those numbers are not as
accurate for this year because of some
of the changes that have happened for us
um in terms of uh people moving in to
town bandov um no this chair is
actually easier so um so we are growing
each year now Now by 10 to 15 kids um
this year with the exception it was more
than that um and that was because we
opened that for um PR school um with
that necessity good news is you'll see
babies all over town um and our
preschool will continue to maintain 60
to 62 kids religiously now because if we
fall a few kids short um it's absolutely
going to be filled in that prek program
with our neighbors um from he and Mar so
that's not issue that program itself
you'll notice this year we're not going
to have to put it and it hasn't been in
the five years I've been in here in the
general fund it's still
sub um which is great so you won't see
any increases due to the increase in
preschool uh so that's wonderful we're
talking about now let's see when I got
here we had 174 kids we're at
243 um 44 kids we've grown by at least
two full classroom 60 to 70 kids we can
see the difference there um which is
fantastic when we look at the growth
numbers for the next couple of years um
we anticipate again 10 to 15 kids growth
minimum um we know that people within
this building are putting in for houses
and if you know anybody in town that
sells houses they can tell you that um
most people have lost bids now Rosemary
poor Rosemary here um one of her
children has been looking for a house in
hand open for a while and today they
realized that they lost the 11th big for
a house here um so that's all great news
the houses are selling like hot cakes
for more than their advertised course so
when we demographic numbers that's where
we are we have um tried to allow those
classes to explode um because we were
kind of between numbers there I know if
you go back to 2010 I'll give you a
packet when we get to the budget from
2008 till now in terms of class size and
numbers and things like that but um when
you look at the demographics there um we
have have you know let the classes get
as big as we could could possibly let
them legally even yet um so third grade
for example this year has 36 kids in it
and so there's just no way next year to
go to one fourth grade class that's
against the B so we will have to add an
additional fourth grade class to
accommodate um that one um after the
start of the school year this year um
are fourth grade balloons to 27 kids
which everybody holds their breath
because nowhere ever I've gone back to
the year 2000 and there's no way ever
that the class sizes here are higher
than 20 you know I mean it just wasn't
and so the 27 thankfully we have a
fairly new teacher who she doesn't know
any different so it's wonderful because
she's never had those classes of 15 so
she's fantastic teacher um and the needs
of the kids in that class with the
exception of just a couple um were
reasonable because that always denotes
class size as well um for example
hypothetically you couldn't have a class
of even 16 if seven of them were um
students that that were diagnosed with
autism that would be unreasonable but
you could have a class of 17 or 18 kids
if in fact there are no high needs kids
in that class easily so that also plays
a factor in it we're up to 26 kids in
fifth grade um and so those upper
classes um the 10 new kids that came in
this year were not all uh prepay K uh we
got a large number of last minute um you
know fourth and fifth and sixth graders
we can hold off one more year on Sixth
it'll be big next year um that one will
be 2 What till 27 27th but we definitely
legally have to have a new fourth grade
class and Fifth and keep in mind as we
get back to the Heyday of the F the the
time period when we had at least three
classes per grade here that also means
that the reductions that were made to
specials over the years um are going to
have to go up a little bit and so we'll
keep those schedules as tight as
possible no extra time but for example
we have um an art teacher that um had
been dropped to three days a week over
the past few years because our classes
there were less classes to teach art to
um we will need to make that one four
days next year otherwise the art teacher
won't be able to see all the classes um
the other part-time is Spanish we had
dropped that down to um two mornings
that was a point two so that was
technically one day a week that'll have
to be two days a week um next year or we
can't get those CL classes in as well
and um Library the same thing we had
years ago um reduced that down to6 so
that'll go to point8 so um total it's
3.1 is the um number of FTE that we need
so three full teachers and A.1 INE as an
increase yeah so that would be oh and um
we had dropped we have um for
intervention we have our reading
specialist full-time we've had that for
um a while we've never been able to
waiver on that one because of the needs
of the students but we only have the
halftime math interventionist and so we
do need the other part is the the math
intervention so a halftime math
interventionist which um we're going to
try to work with the best we can the
part-time staff that we already have
existing here making them full-time or
closer to full-time from the point 6 to
point8 um so ultimately it'll be the two
new classroom teachers for grade four
and for grade five so that's what we're
looking at there um um when we take the
new contracts um for theer and the noner
and build that in we are not finished
yet we're working on it diligently but
once all those numbers are able to be
given to the board of ed um at the next
meeting not the one this next week um
then I mean as I said we're not looking
at 16 I would estimate the number by the
way brought one other thing the number
for the benefits the Consortium that we
all share Heber and over marbor Boards
of Ed town of and ahm the number that
they have us as a placeholder right now
with the insurance Consortium is 9% we
will meet again two more times before we
have to bring our budget to guys I know
um but keep in mind we say 9% the one
advantage is we are still and this would
be why we're still way better off as a
self-insured Consortium is we are
looking at 9% increase in premiums from
this now remember I have another
district and I work with lots of other
districts most other District's
consortiums may be looking at 9% 9%
increase from this because our insurance
uh Consortium is very successful and we
pay less as a Consortium than a lot of
other districts do or in other
Consortium that that 9% increase that's
the same for town oh absolutely right it
would be I'd be giving that number to
Eric too yeah I mean whatever my number
is for percentage of increase for
insurance of course we have way more
people insured so the number itself is
bigger but his percentage in the end is
going to be the same as mine and Hein
and Marboro and RAM everybody's number
will be the same in the end are so are
there any major like um special ed
increases to the budget for next not
that we know of right now um but we we
have a couple of adjustments remember
when that's a really good question when
we look at all the IPS let's say of
every kid we have in the district that's
special at well we are doing right now
is going okay so hypothetical kid number
one um has three hours a week of speech
let's look at the uh new IEP for next
year do they still have three hours of
speech no they have six oh okay so now
we have to factor in three more hours of
speech at X number of whatever OT PT um
any student that would be outplaced any
student that receives others so we're
almost done with that as Taylor finishes
with you know the meetings with the
special ed director and families of kind
of knowing where we are we don't haate
anticipate any dramatic increases and
changes um we also have to look at the
students that attend Charter magnet
schools because Magnet School tuition
comes through my my budget as well so if
somebody who resides in Andover has
children that attend a magnet school we
get the bill and that you there's a line
item in there for that so um we did just
find out but um I think we still be okay
we did just find out that there was an
anal resident that enrolled um a
kindergartener in magnet school and we
got the bill we're like who's this even
this is you just get the bill so the
good news is we'll get all the
fine-tuning of the budget things like I
know that we're going to have me you're
good at you really know your stuff and
you but we're going to have meetings you
know we're gonna go through the if
you're looking for a rough um percentage
right now I would say that it's going to
be someplace
between uh
6.7 and N um no so remember we did just
settle two new contracts
so if you're looking you know at what
that number looks like with our budget
we can figure it out I know right now if
I'm I'm being very honest that I hate
throwing numbers out especially if
people are writing them down but I mean
I want to be as open and transparent as
I can with you I I see that number um
probably being in the the the low to mid
300s um because you figure there's two
full St time sta as well so we
appreciate it we don't this this meeting
no but it's good we're here together um
yeah and just the major factors that
we're going to in in overview so that's
good so that because if you look at that
that right there uh the new staff that
we would need to accommodate the the
increase right there I mean that in my
head I'm trying to figure it out that's
right there that's where you're like 4.9
5% is right there well it's unbelievable
that you could have 27 or 26 students in
a classroom and they're doing it this
year they are
so that teacher that is that is not the
impression of the taxpayer in the town
the taxpayer in the town think you got
15 people or every single one of our
agendas the
topend every agenda pack they see it
yeah so yeah there's a couple of quite
large classes there those are you know
so that that covers demographic
projections for the next three to five
years big we got lot of babies
which kind of flies in the face of the
state
population projections that we're
required to use for so many things you
know we're we're defying the trend what
what's the current number the trend
well3 what is that 243 what
oh 17 inclusive of all
grades every child responsible for every
child and when you stated 174 was your
starting point that was before all the
pre no 174 five years ago when I was
hired was inclusive of all of the
students I was resp no no no I
understand that what I'm asking that
included prek was there a prek program
if a school district has pre when do you
look at their enrollment numbers in
there I just wanted to know that's a 60
some OD difference I just want to know
PR F Day prek program started in uh 200
six or seven years ago it was 2016
because my son was in the first class
that was the full day so the good thing
is you know Apples to Apples when you're
looking at enrollment summaries for
every school district if they have a
full-time preschool program it's a
November so if they tell you they have
400 kids all the preschool numbers are
there but can I just say y the preschool
numbers
here two years ago were only like 30 35
students y
so the preschool is supposed to run
fiscally independently financially right
it does so that 60 or 61 kids is not
indicative what is K through six pre
through six is I'm just saying that are
you you're asking what percent of those
are from Andover versus from outside
towns um well I'm saying that the
preschool program has grown loops and
Bounds I think bigger than necessarily
the K through six which you agree
percent Liz you are absolutely right p
through six we're getting 10 to 12 kids
per year
new we had 11 this year in K through six
so far it's
December so 10 above what you had last
year so last year now it's 30 correct of
the kids
K so the number that you the chart you
sent
me in the email the other day
by added up the columns the K through
six classes currently versus next year
is actually a net negative
one no oh well it might be you know why
because
kindergarteners are going to vary from
year to year so we know how many
kindergarteners are coming in that we
know of and that have not gone to
preschool here that will be coming in
next year and so that's why I'm saying
the k6 number we estimate is could be 10
to 15 we don't know because we had 11
this year with six of them in grades
three four five and six or seven of them
how many of them six I'm just comparing
the numbers well you put that you put
you can't go Kindergarten because some
of those kids don't exist on there yet
okay um they they don't exist on there
yet because if they didn't go to
preschool here and we know they're
coming next year they're in my next year
projection numbers but they haven't
appeared here yet
okay so for example there's a few kids
that tried preschool and said no I'm not
going to send them to preschool but
they're aging into kindergarten next
year so they're already on my list for
Kindergarten for next year okay so so
they're not part of our current prek
number but they will be part of our K
number next year this the 60 children
that are in the pek program how many of
them are Andover residents this year
currently are Andover responsibility
there's there's nine kids that took out
of town spots I can tell you that
there's nine kids
51 going progress into this
school so for example without giving de
demographic information away about
certain people but hypothetically if
there is um a person in this building
that works here that um is attempting to
hypothetically attempting to live here
and their children are in there um we
don't know if their numbers yet will be
part of kindergarten that are in
preschool but they're in our AES numbers
right now and not our out of town
numbers also mixe preschool so just keep
in
mind we have one two and three year
preschoolers oh so I trying
to thinking next year we got
51 cut off right so now
cember that have been in there for years
gotta so um we have for example one out
of toer who this is their third year
with us they were with us before we even
um because they didn't have a spot they
came in as um when before we had four
classes so but they'll be gone at the
end of this year they'll go to
kindergarten in in the T that they live
in next door so but yes so it's like a
threeyear rotation for some of those
kids yes as opposed to like 60 new
kidart kids coming right and so that's
the tough part um bill is not only
making sure that we know those kids the
ones that we know that live in town like
I I get some of these numbers from Carol
um some of the ones that live in town
that haven't told us they live in town
yet because if somebody moves in
tomorrow and they have a child that's
going to either go to preschool or
kindergarten next year and we don't know
we won't know until enrollment happens
and they may enroll
August yes yes sometimes that happens in
August so um that's the difficulty of
those two low grades but everybody else
we know unless they move in um so our
numbers are pretty solid for let's say 1
through 6th um unless unless somebody
moves in or out we're very very solid
with our numbers for one through six the
other ones prek will always be the 60
because we know we can fill those kids
outside and that's why I know it'll be
self-sufficient because we know what
tuition is um and I know my grant um is
the Smart Start School Readiness GRS so
that one will remain um self-sufficient
any other questions for Valerie before
we go on to a different
topic okay I know I missed one here and
that was important just like a a rundown
of the the changes that I want to get to
the school part before left but uh so
did you want to talk to the new budget
process for the town Charter well that's
not me but I was hoping either Eric or
Jeff could just tell us quickly like
where you thought the charter because I
know you were involved in in making
those changes we talked about it at the
big meeting
but well the voters voted on the changes
just so
are we still waiting for the town
attorney and like like for them to
decide what that ends up being there
there's the wording I mean it's
basically because let's go from the
budget process the one thing that didn't
pass from the budget process was a
quorum for the meeting so we have to
have 25 people go to the town meeting so
what's going to end up happening is the
budget timeline is going to be pushed up
so we can coordinate with the ram
referendum right so we will only have
one budget and first budget referendum
in the town of and for both the town
budget and the ram budget so it is
pushing it up four weeks
there uh so the townwide budget
referendum and RAM referend will be May
6th the annual Town budget meeting uh
would be April 9th so we have to have
everything done April 9th which is
basically almost a month in advance of
what we done in the past
um hopefully it doesn't get any more
cumbersome than than making some
decisions earlier
uh that way you know we're just going to
go through the same process that we've
gone through in the past just four weeks
earlier and we talked about having
combination meetings too was that part
of the the charger changes too uh I
think that was just meant so that we got
together and talked about what was going
to happen they're doing right now yeah
but we I don't I used to always attend
all of your meetings knew so I don't
mind that part if we're right if we're
gonna have a meeting to get together
okay so
that yeah I just wanted a quick overview
of that but I mean it's still will be
basically the process from the town side
is Eric puts together the budget we give
him our priorities he then goes back and
refines it to sit there and say we're
trying to do things so last year what we
did was the new community set C was
coming online we tried we wanted to put
in a community center director a senior
center director to sit there and make as
best use of that space as we possibly
could so that was
our that was pretty much our largest
transaction for last year that we we
pushed forward
so reality is the town budget is is
fairly and we have not pushed for any
significant increases in numbers of
years I mean last year was probably the
largest that you've seen come out of our
budget cycles for six
years I don't necessarily know ER if
there's anything significant on the
agenda for for the next budget cycle
coming up unless you aware of no I mean
the there if you look at the major cost
drivers um we're going to be paying less
for diesel and heating fuel this year
rather than last
um which
is not a huge line item but it helps um
we're going to be paying a little bit
more for electricity
but uh in terms of major projects The
Bunker Hill bridge that is cost neutral
that is fully funded the problem is we
probably really should pursue a bank
line of credit so that we have swing
funding because there's a Time gap
between when we owe the contractors the
money and when we get reimbursed by the
state and federal government we voted
for
that right
but can I get you to come over here
because you're going into your own
little section here and I think you
won't pick you up where you are doesn't
like you there yeah he doesn't like us
down here either but do you guys not
Aline currently no we don't you don't at
all no okay so we will need pursue a
line of credit um that does technically
take a town meeting that is not
something the board of Finance or Board
of Selectmen has the authority to
authorize uh on their own so that's
going to have to happen sometime sooner
rather than later um the other large
project will be the repair or
replacement of the bridge Culver on Lake
Road at Bola uh this next budget cycle
if we continue to fund the bridge and
Culvert fund
that one will be fully funded that's
half paid for by the state half paid for
by the town after that we got somewhere
around a six or S million backlog in
mediumsized
Culbertson of stuff we're going to have
to address in the next 10 or 15 years
but for right now we're focusing on Lake
Road so can those be capital projects oh
yeah okay just
we we talked about feeling coverts and
you
know stuff it's got to it's it's got to
be integrated for the best of the Town y
thank um other large projects the
community center fit out um we did get
an arpa Senior Center specific Grant um
we need to allocate the money for that
at the next Board of selectman meeting
because we have to do it by the end of
the year um we have a little bit left in
our existing arpa funds that we'll spend
out uh both of those will be spent on
outfitting the kitchen uh at the
community center um we are still
awaiting word about whether we will get
a federal legislative
appropriation uh that will fund the
generator in finishing the the first
floor of that building
um it made it through the Senate
Appropriations Committee but given the
political climate I've been told that
that's uh a lot of those will not get
funded so we may or may not get that we
won't know till the earliest March now
apparently they said that's when the
earliest they think there'll be a budget
pass it was supposed to be passed in
October but they never come out on time
um the route 316 multi-use pathway that
is still still in the design phase um
between initial design money
and uh construction money we've secured
about $2.9 million in total funding um
we're still missing somewhere around
$100,000 to finish the design so that's
going to have to be something that the
board of uh Finance um considers um but
look at it on the bright side we still
will have funded 97% of the cost
so uh that's pretty good um that's it
we're not looking at any other major
Personnel
changes um
we uh are so you are all aware losing
our resent state trooper uh in about two
weeks um you say losing he's going to be
replaced or losing no he will be so we
will we should know within the next week
who the temporary replace M OB um the
state police has already put out the
notice of availability unfortunately we
don't have a lot of choice in who they
assigned to us as resident state
troopers but resident state trooper
positions are really good gigs for
police officers um so I've certainly
already had multiple people police
officers approach me and ask me
questions about the town of Andover that
are uh clearly going to apply for the
job so um the uncertainty with that is
until you know the seniority of the
trooper assigned you have no idea what
the cost structure is um and that can be
a plus or minus 30 or
$40,000 depending on their because what
we pay for is we pay a salary plus a set
uh amount of indirect costs um that's
associated with that position for you
know vehicle and equipment and you know
all that stuff
so I don't know when we're going to know
that even as soon as a trooper is
assigned we should be able to make a
reasonable estimate as to what what our
cost basis will be but
that's do you not know do you not know
what that trooper's status is or or um
years of service is prior to interview
or prior to making the offer well see we
don't get to make the offer
contract with the state police and the
state police assign us a resent
State actually we actually have zero say
in who we get as the temporary person or
as either the tempor or the
per um once they assign it then we know
wow so nice um when we went
from uh for those who you knew who knew
darl T darl trro was a very
senior uh by the time he he left here um
he went to another town was immediately
promoted to a sergeant got promoted to a
lieutenant now he is running um
basically four of the the troops in the
eastern half of the country so he's said
he went from Andover to being a police
captain in about a year because he was a
very very senior guy um when we
transitioned to Sebastian it was about a
$440,000
savings um versus the trooper we had so
until we know what that is that's a
variable cost I don't really know that
so the the other thing that we all have
to be aware of is that there have been a
couple things that are going
to that are going to affect the grand
list um and the grand list is likely to
be flat um hopefully not actually
decreasing
um there's not a ton of residential
development in the town um the there's a
state law that exempts a series of
disabled
seniors um in the cost of their home so
ABD to that will come off the tax roles
and then the state has revamped the way
Motor Vehicles are uh
evaluated um to basically an MSRP plus a
depreciation schedule it looks like
that's going to decrease our motor
vehicle Grand list but until we get the
actual list from the state we don't
really know um so for the first time in
a while most years we have a couple
percent between a 1 and a half and 2 and
a half% cushion where we can increase
our total budget by 2 and a half% and
keep the mill rate flat right now any
increase in our budget is likely to make
the mill rate dog um if you look at it
historically anytime the mill rate goes
up more than 3%
roughly uh the town has a
problem so we are going to face some
some headwinds
overall
um that's it unless you got what about
what about the veterans
execution what about how much is that
going to impact the top we don't know
and we won't even know when the budget
is passed because the law allows you to
even 6 months after the budget cycle is
started to present your paperwork it be
given the credit that's
retroactive so
um it is a something that the
legislature has been asked to re address
because the what the intention of the
law in in the actual language are two
very different things and the projection
that the state legislature had for what
the actual cost to municipalities was
off about fourfold so it's impacting
towns a lot more than the state assured
the towns would when they were thinking
about this as a hypothetical so I can
plan on no property tax yeah is it an
exemption or reduction you're not
disabled yet you walk the lake every
day
did any other questions for
yeah um the projected new business
that's coming into town is that going to
have a good effect hopefully what
business are we talking about the
restaurant the restaurant the restaurant
chines restaurant oh that's pretty
minimal because the the building is
already uh
taxed so you're you're really just
getting an additional tax on the
personal property that is owned by the
business so that's going to be fairly
minimal minim um we'll get a little bit
because some of the cell towers have
upgraded antennas and stuff like that so
we'll get we'll see a little bit of an
increase for that um but again not big
um there's no other real commercial
development that I know of um
and yeah and we've
taken yeah that I want to say something
but I won
Eric when you spoke on the grand l so
that FS into count homes that have sold
increased value and also the deduction
that you talked about with um the
disable or
the correct that's it's it's got of net
out you're thinking yeah I think the
grand list is likely to decrease or be
flat yeah um because well have to wait
for re right the
evaluation year the fact that that
houses are worth more this year than
they were last year doesn't matter we
reow on a fiveyear schedule so
2026 you'll see the next reow when the
assessments will change um yeah other
than Things That Go
scary the way prices are going up it's a
good thing for the
no that's good any other questions for
Eric I have question still three school
buses or four do we know yet um if the
increase with the number of kids stays
just with the preschool will be able to
stay with
great if the new enrollment of students
is K because they don't take the bus if
they're K to six um then we would have
to do for so when will we know whether
we're budgeting for poor um we will
keep well that thing is like we kept
four in this year not
knowing but I'm glad we did because then
we wound up with transportation that was
special for multiple students with the
van that we have through the town we
would have been able to fund that
otherwise right what we didn't do is we
didn't what I need to know is how much I
need to account for diesel because the
fourth bus jumps that fairly for right
now I would say keep it where it is for
diesel because if we keep our number
where it is right now um in terms of the
bus that will accommodate those two
other runs that we have with the other
students in the town vehicle and it's
it's you have that number it's the same
diesel we use this year with our
current so I would keep it with it is
Eric well the number we used this year
in last
year well yeah because remember the
contract that we have with you guys now
for those additional students that we
use the town vehicle for wasn't in the
budget right so it's coming out of that
line where that additional fourth bus
that I'm not currently using
is that's on your side but that's on
your side what I'm say diesel cost we're
using
they get charged the diesel and they
send us a bill keep that where it is now
with the same number of of
gallons but we we charge you what you
use right that's what he's trying to get
to us exactly where we are right now do
not plan for uh additional
bu okay so I'd like to move on to the
board of Finance section here and Joan
are you talking to that I mean we wanted
to just have this meeting be an overview
of things we know that we're going to
get into the nuts and bolts of the
budgeting and the expectations as we go
along um that's why I wanted to talk to
you know about the charter changes and
everything as far as timelines I'm
thinking I don't know if my fellow board
members agree but we have a December
meeting coming up I think we're probably
going to take some input to those of us
that are present here we'll have to
share you know Kim is there and and
probably maybe send out a memo or an
email I don't think you know we probably
just the timelines and things that we've
discussed with Eric at our last meeting
as well as to when we want to have them
presented or you know talk about the
major factors so I think we're in good
shape I don't think it's
really um I know the fending targets was
on here we've already been told that the
budgets are rising you know so so it's
probably unfair at this point to stay
try to keep it to 2 or 3% we're probably
just going to have to do a lot of work
when we're in those budget meetings we
had that discussion at our last meeting
we just felt it wasn't appropriate for
us to come up with a number coming into
this meeting without hearing everything
that told us Eric just told us we just
want to reserve the right to discuss at
our next
meeting with information rather than
just taking us scab so that's kind of
where we left it I think de yeah
yeah make it for that yeah so little
preim premature to do the expectations
so we certainly will get them out to
everyone and then we're going to have to
come up with you know I think we'll have
a joint meeting Eric you said with the
board of Selectmen I believe at some
point and I know there were dates I
think there were seven joint
me saying no
no I think all we need to have is one
for the charter right well this and this
could suffice
good we were at our
last that's what I thought the charter
rision heard the charter we're supposed
to have one initial meeting prior to
October 45 well we knew we couldn't do
that to layout Budget prior ities
obviously that's not going to happen um
not for this current year um at that it
what the charter says is quote the board
of Finance may suggest Target
expenditures for General government and
board of education but it is not binding
initial discussion of capital projects
for upcoming year so in my mind that
means that me as the town will have had
to have presented the updated Capital
plans to CIP prior
to uh you know that meeting in October
that way it can go you know at that
point we have an
initial you know essentially Town
Capital plan um which is pretty early um
I am anticipating that February 3rd I
will have a fully fleshed out draft
budget work work book avail able for the
town General budget and the capital
budget for the board of finance and
board of Selectmen review and how you
want to do joint meetings when you want
to start them um that is up to you the
charter says in the month of March there
will be joint meetings between the board
of finance and board of it'll be March I
think right that's what we usually do is
like just bunch of them in a row and
just like okay CH to you give it to us
on February
3r when we have a chance to review it
and
then well the way the way it's worked or
it should it should work now that we
have a Time administrator ER prepares
the budget we tell him he gives it to us
preliminary we tell him if there's
things that we want him to add or
subtract yeah and then it goes to the
board of finance and get you picked
apart I mean no it's honest it's it's
trueth what happen I mean like last year
I mean it's not a negative it's just how
it is process it's the process I mean
and once it gets past us right you know
comes to us foreview comes to you for
review and and what you decide and what
the board of Finance votes goes to the
time yeah so can I ask for the capital
stuff for the school that we briefly
touched on you want something in writing
I understand you guys want that as soon
as possible when do you need that by
well February no no no what she was
asking was it was should have been once
you have your fiveyear Capital plan you
would update it for every October right
I understand that we're not there right
now our plan for like for this year
until June was to have a fiveyear plan
the bathroom just get us the quote what
you want to sit there and do it and then
we're GNA sit there and wrap that into
the capital plan and budget that's
presented back to the plenty of time for
this
year
of just a quote on the project
okay any other questions for the
finance I'm going to move on to
correspondence I'm not aware of any
anybody have corresponded for
tonight in that case
I thought we had somebody from the
public oh she's on the okay so we
have
um before we talk about a German i' just
like to say I think this meeting was
productive and I think that when we had
this Capital plan you know if anybody
sees that it's got something other than
b elevators and driveways from the
school you know we should say where'
that come from you know and try to to
find out because Cel was pretty clear
that's what she was looking for there
same thing with with the talent I hope
they put more than those three things
out there it's land it's it's like it's
got to be funded so it's things that the
board of education is seeing within the
building that need to be repaired so if
you only come with those three things
right now
right start think about those longterm
we can get through this year's budget
with the information we know right now
exactly and then they will they already
are working they said that's part of
their yeah their goals this year to work
on it and they are and to to use another
Steven cvy quote kind like stepen Cy
seven habits highly affects some people
you seek first to understand and then be
understood everybody here I think is
doing a great job you know trying to do
their stuff and and we sometimes we
don't listen to the other person to try
and understand enough what they're
coming from and I always find that very
helpful and I learn a lot that way so
suggest
that can I appreciate the opportunity to
get together with you all tonight hear
what's going on with
you good job
question um and I know this was brought
up when we had this meeting last year um
and I had suggested SL recommended I I
think that this type of meeting should
happen more than once a year um I don't
know what other people's thoughts and
feelings are on that I know last year we
talked about it and then well life gets
busy we should I don't think it was
maybe we should have a cocktail exactly
exactly I am 100% with
you we should them no we need to we need
to we're not done we have a journey I
will say this for the public it doesn't
matter we need to understand each other
as people and understand what we're all
dealing with exactly and you know it's
it's a lot easier if I know you and I I
understand you and you can come talk to
me I'm all for I see Eric on my walks
he's the guy I see I know he takes his
kids and rides the Bike to School
winter I do I mean it's how it is Jed
walks all the time and usually brings
rain
but better it's better that do
things to look like to plan to a meeting
of
in this after
with that would be J or something long
as J is the moderator
we're and with that I'm looking for
motion
toour okay okay all in favor I any
opposed okay thank very much everybody